So in this video, we will talk about performance evaluation of segmentation algorithms.
As we have seen in the exercise that we have done,
we used Cross-Entropy loss,
and Cross-Entropy loss can work pretty well.
This is a classic metric for clarification project.
Although Cross-Entropy loss tends to favor the dominant class,
especially if your class has become highly imbalanced.
For example, if you haven't done that,
I invite you to come back to
the exercise and try to increase the field of view or try to throw in slices
which do not have any ground truth segmentations on them and see how it
changes the tendency for your network to under-segment the structure.
So we will talk about some of the other metrics that you can use for segmentation,
things like Dice, Jaccard,
and the Hausdorff distance.
So first, a few words on metrics which are really
popular in statistical performance evaluation; sensitivity and specificity.
This metrics could also be used for
evaluating the performance of segmentation algorithms.
They're fairly easy to compute because you just
need to count the number of voxels that you predict correctly and
compare them to the number of voxels that are
labeled as your structures or background in the ground truth.
These metrics are easily relatable to clinicians
because as we will see further in the lectures,
clinicians operate in terms of sensitivity and specificity of
tests quite often, and basically, sensitivity,
which is a measure of a true positive rate,
and it basically means the tendency of your model to under-segment structure,
while specificity, which is a measure of true negative rate,
it defines the tendency of your model two over-segment structures.
But the problem with specificity and sensitivity is that specificity relies on
the count of true negatives in your segmentation and in your ground truth,
and that count relies upon having information about all the population,
or in our case, all the background voxels.
Therefore, the specificity metric tends to favor
larger segments and tends to penalize smaller segments more than larger segments.
These metrics only make sense when they come together,
because if you have 100 percent sensitivity, it may mean a few things.
It may mean that your model has very few false negatives or it may
mean that your model just does not predict any negatives at all.
So sensitivity and specificity only makes sense when they're presented together.
Therefore, because of this problem,
there are a few other metrics that people have thought about.
So one metric which could address some of the problems that we
have just discussed is called dissimilarity coefficient.
It has been developed in the four years by two botanists,
Thorvald Sorensen and Lee Raymond Dice.
This metric could be computed by taking the intersection
of two volumes and dividing that by their sum.
This metric is fairly easy to compute because you just need to
add up all the pixels and you just need
to know what pixels belong to
your prediction and what pixels belongs to your ground truth.
This metric is fairly popular choice
for measuring performance of segmentation algorithms.
One thing to watch out in this metric,
that your gradients may become unstable if you have very small values in the denominator.
So you need to watch out for potentially the problem of exploding gradients.
Another metric which is also quite popular for measuring the performance of
segmentation algorithms and which has been used in
the literature is called Jaccard Index.
Jaccard Index is computed by dividing the intersection
of two volumes by the union of the two volumes.
Actually, this metric is no different from Dice coefficient because it's
measuring the same thing and one can be easily derived from the other.
So it does not really make sense to look at both
because one does not give you any new information compared to the other.
At the same time, the values that are produced are a little bit
different and some people prefer looking at one over the other.
The problem with both Dice metric and
Jaccard metric can be illustrated by the following example.
So let us look at this structure here.
Let's assume that this is a square with sides 1,
and you have another structure,
this is your prediction,
a square of the size 1.1.
So if we compute the dice similarity score,
we get the dissimilarity score of 90 percent here.
Let us look at another example.
Let's assume so you have the same ground-truth structure,
which is a square with a side of 1,
and now your prediction looks like this.
So you have a section which overlaps very precisely on top of
the ground truth and you have this offshoot that goes off to the sides,
which is long, but very narrow.
Well, guess what? Your dissimilarity score could be exactly the same.
Therefore, dissimilarity score does not
necessarily tell you how exactly structures are different.
So 90 percent of dissimilarity score can mean,
as we see in this example, very different things.
Sometimes this is not a big problem.
If you know that your model does not tend to segment
this narrow structures or your ground truth does not have those.
Sometimes where you're measuring
highly irregular shapes or things like vascular structures,
your Dice score might not be the best metric to measure the performance.
There are some tricks to address that and
one such trick is a metric which is called Hausdorff distance.
Hausdorff distance is a metric which is defined by this,
what may seem to be a complex mathematical expression, but basically,
what it means is that we have two structures here that we're comparing,
our set X and set Y.
What we do, we look at every point on the boundary of
x and we compute the distance to Y from every point,
and we find the point which has the maximum distance to Y.
Then we do the same thing, but looking it from the Y's edge perspective.
So we go through every points of the set Y and
we find the one which is furthest from the X.
We take the maximum of those two values,
and these two values, as this example illustrates,
might not be the same.
For example, this value from the set X,
if we look from the Y's perspective,
where we sit on this point,
the shortest distance to X might be here, probably,
but if we look from X perspective and if we go into this trough here,
we will see that it's the farthest Y, and similar here.
So Hausdorff Distance actually addresses this problem
that we just discussed with dissimilarity coefficient.
Hausdorff Distance penalizes when your model tends to either create
those long half-shoots or
the ground truth structures are highly
irregular and the model is not exactly capturing that.
The problem with Hausdorff Distance is that it is not that easy to compute.
You basically need to evaluate
all the distances between two sets and when you get into 3D,
it gets particularly intensive.
Something that people do is computing Mean Slice-Wise Hausdorff Distance.
So basically, you compute a two-dimensional Hausdorff Distance
for every slice in your segmentation and then you take the mean of that.
So in this section, we have talked about several metrics for segmentation,
we have talked about Dice Score,
we have talked about Hausdorff Distance.
One of the key takeaways is that,
there is no one metric which is perfect and you need to
understand where the ground truth is coming from,
and what are the requirements and performance constraints of your algorithm,
and what is the clinical environment that the algorithm will be operating on.
In the next section,
Martin will join us and talk about the clinical performance evaluation of
diagnostic tests and other automated decision-making systems,
and you will see what it means for
a clinician when you present your performance relation characteristics to them.